---
layout: post
title: LED cube 4x4x4 with ATtiny84 and 74138
categories: electronics
published: true
tags: [buildlog, freeform, electronics]
image: /images/ledcube/IMG_20180605_225550.jpg
---

I made a LED cube. A silly thing that blinks a lot and is controlled by programmable microcontroller. But why? And how?

<!--more-->

## How did I get here?

I must admit that I am quite new to all this home-made-electronics-for-fun. Although I studied electronics and computer systems on secondary school, I have never tried playing with components at home. I focused on programming since those early times. 

But earlier this year I read [a book from Czech blogger/writer Martin Maly](http://elektrokniha.cz) (unfortunately (for prospective non-Czech-speaking reader) the book is in Czech language). I tried the book because I enjoy blog posts and articles written by Martin. And as I was reading it, a strong urge to try something, to build something, started to grow inside me.

So I ordered a lot of basic components and ICs from Aliexpress (of course!) and Amazon. I started to play and having fun. Several months passed, and I am still enjoying my new hobby and I spend time  with electronics components and **Arduinos**, **ATtinys**, **ESP8266**, and so on. Small yellow envelopes from china come in continuous stream and make me happy every week.

## LED Cube

LED cubes are very popular beginner project. But at the beginning I considered that blinking cube is lame and not worth the effort. But, you know, time passed. I began to solder and had trouble with it, so I thought: "I must practice". And of course, LED cube is an obvious candidate, when you want to practice soldering. So here it is. It's actually my first really finished project - it has an enclosure! 

{% responsive_image path: images/ledcube/IMG_20180605_225550.jpg alt: "LED Cube" figcaption: "Finished LED Cube" %}

It is a 4x4x4 cube, pretty small, because my LEDs had quite short legs.
I am not going to explain basic principles for designing and building those cubes, there are plenty of tutorials and guides available online (such as [this](http://www.instructables.com/id/LED-Cube-4x4x4/) or [this](http://www.instructables.com/id/4x4x4-LED-Cube-Arduino-Uno/)). I am going to focus on those less usual properties of my approach.

The most important thing is to be able to light one LED in a cube. When we switch selected diode quickly, we can create [a persistence of vision effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistence_of_vision) and therefore a pattern or an animation. 

The trick is to connect all the diodes in a column together (in my case their cathodes) and all the diodes in a level (their anodes) together. When you want to select (= turn on) a diode in a particular column, you'll connect the column to the ground (other columns are `HIGH`), and diodes level to `HIGH` (and, of course, there should be a current limiting resistor somewhere).

That gives us 16 columns and 4 levels. That's 20 signals, but **ATtiny84** has only 12 available control PINs. For example an Arduino UNO board has exactly 20 pins, so you can use it without another integrated circuit.

## How is my LED cube made

I didn't really want to buy any specialized components for this project, so I forced myself to use ICs I had at home. I also didn't want to waste one whole Arduino board on a silly blinking thing, so I decided to drive it by a cheap and small [ATtiny84](https://www.microchip.com/wwwproducts/en/ATtiny84).

There are more solutions to this problem and I decided to use a couple of **3 line to 8 line decoders/demultiplexers** ([74138](http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/sn74ls138.pdf)). This integrated circuit allows you to select one of 8 outputs with 3 wires, you are basically sending a binary value 0-7 in order to select one output. Here's a functional table for 74138. The main reason for my decision was simple: I had them at home.

<figure style="width: 100%; overflow-x: scroll">
    <table cellspacing="0"  style="border-bottom:1px solid gray">
    <tr>
        <th colspan="3" style="border-right:1px solid gray" >select</th>
        <th colspan="8">output</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>C</th><th>B</th><th style="border-right:1px solid gray" >A</th>
        {% for i in (0..7) %}<th>Y<sub>{{i}}</sub></th>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>L</td><td>L</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">L</td>
        {% assign v=0 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>L</td><td>L</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">H</td>
        {% assign v=1 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>L</td><td>H</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">L</td>
        {% assign v=2 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>L</td><td>H</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">H</td>
        {% assign v=3 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>H</td><td>L</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">L</td>
        {% assign v=4 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>H</td><td>L</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">H</td>
        {% assign v=5 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>H</td><td>H</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">L</td>
        {% assign v=6 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>H</td><td>H</td><td style="border-right:1px solid gray">H</td>
        {% assign v=7 %}{% for i in (0..7) %}<td>{% if i == v %}L{% else %}H{%endif%}</td>{% endfor %}
    </tr>
    </table>
    <figcaption>Functional table for 74138. L means `LOW`, H `HIGH`</figcaption>
</figure>

There are another 3 inputs, not included in the table, which allows to select (or enable) the IC. They allow for easy chaining of such ICs. My LED cube has 16 columns, so I needed two pieces of 74138 and that means one additional line for chip selection. So there are 4 pins required for a column selection and therefore 8 pins for the whole cube. Neat. 74138  use `LOW` signal for selected output. That means that all signals are normally `HIGH` and only the selected one is `LOW`. That's why I had to create columns with a common cathode and not common anode (most of the tutorials online will use common anode for columns).

Although there's always only one diode turned on and thus a current flowing through **ATtiny84** is limited, I still decided to use transistors to power levels. This wasn't necessary but I felt I would do it just for fun. You can find details in a schematic.

{% responsive_image path: images/ledcube/schematic.png alt: "Schematic" figcaption: "Schematic" %}

[Schematic is also available at EasyEDA.](https://easyeda.com/josefadamcik/ledcubedriver)

## Final build

The cube has three modes: snake, cycling levels and random. A button toggles between modes and a potentiometer controls speed.

Here's a gallery and a also a [video on youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VQNsp-L_gPY).

{% include gallery.html galleryname="ledcube" %}

## Source code

The code uses Arduino platform. But I moved from Arduino IDE to VisualStudioCode with [PlatformIO](https://platformio.org). Source code is ugly, but it works. I finished the LED cube maybe 2 months ago and quality of code in new projects is going to be better. I am in progress of relearning C++, because I haven't used it since my studies.

<a href="https://github.com/josefadamcik/ledcube_4x4_double74138">It's available on Github</a>.

## Bill of materials


| pcs | Name + datasheet |
|----:|:-----------|
|1    | [ATtiny84](https://www.microchip.com/wwwproducts/en/ATtiny84) |
|2    | [74xx138](http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/sn74ls138.pdf) |
|64   | 5mm LED diode |
|-    | wires |
|-    | perfboard |
|1    | button |
|1    | potentiometer (10kΩ) |
|4    | NPN Transistor |
|16   | resistor 680Ω  |
|4    | resistor 5k1Ω |
|1    | ceramic capacitor 0.1µF |
|1    | LM2596 DC to DC buck converter board |
|1    | DC Barrel Power female connector |


## Future?

I might write another mode - game of life or something similar for the LED cube, but otherwise I consider this project to be finished.

I have more work-in-progress projects. The main reason I wanted to wrap-up the LED cube project is, that I am actually finishing another blinking project I would like to report about. 







