---
layout: post
title: LED cube 4x4x4 with Attiny84 and 74138
categories: electronics
published: false
---
## How did I get here?

I must admit that I am quite new to all this home-made-electronics-for-fun (You know what I mean). Although I studied electronics and computer systems on secondary school, I have never tried playing with components at home. I focused on programming. But earlier this year I read [a book from Czech blogger/writer Martin Maly](http://elektrokniha.cz). Unfortunately (for prospective non-czech-speaking reader) the book is in Czech language. I just tried the book because I enjoy blog posts and articles written by Martin. And as I was reading it, a strong urge to try something, to build something, started to grow inside me.

So I ordered a lot of basic components and ICs from Aliexpress (of course!). I started to play, and I was having fun, and I still have. Several months passed, and I am still enjoying playing with electronics and Arduinos and Attinys and ESP8266 and so on. Small yellow envelopes from china come in continuous stream and make me happy every week.

LED cubes are very popular beginner project. But at the beginning I considered that blinking cube from LEDs is lame and not worth the effort. But, you know, time passed. I started with soldering and had trouble with it, so I thought: "I must practice". And of course, UID cube is an obvious candidate, when you want to practice soldering. So here it is. It's actually my first really finished project - it has enclosure! I didn't really want to buy any specialized components for it, so I forced myself to use ICs I had at home. I also didn't want to waste one whole Arduino board on a silly blinking thing, so I decided I will drive it by cheap and small Attiny84.

## My LED cube

It is a 4x4x4 cube, pretty small, because my LEDs had quite short legs.
I am not going to explain basic principles for designing and building those cubes, there are plenty of tutorials and guides online (such as [this](http://www.instructables.com/id/LED-Cube-4x4x4/) or [this](http://www.instructables.com/id/4x4x4-LED-Cube-Arduino-Uno/). I am going to focus on those less usual properties of my approach.

The most important thing is to be able to light one LED in a cube. The trick is to connect all the diodes in every column together (in my case their cathodes) and all diodes in every level (their anodes) together. When you want to select a diode in particular column, you'll connect its column to the ground (other columns are high), and its level to high (and of course, there should be a current limiting resistor somewhere).


That gives us 16 columns and 4 levels. That's 20 signals, but **Attiny84** has only 12 available control PINs. 

There are more solutions to this problem and I decided to use a couple of **3-8 decoders** (**74138**). That means that there are only 4 pins required for a column selection and therefore 8 pins for the whole cube. Win! The particular ICs, I had at home (**74138**), use `LOW` signal for selected output. That means that all signals are normally `HIGH` and only the selected one is `LOW`. That's why I had to create columns with a common cathode and not common anode (most of the tutorials online will use common anode for columns).

Although there's always only one diode turned on and thus a current flowing through **Attiny84** is limited, I still decided to use transistors to power levels. This wasn't necessary but I felt I would do it just for fun. 

## Result


