---
layout: post
title: "Starforged: Valentin Sikorski (Session 8)"
categories: TTRPG
tags: [ttrpg, pnp, soloplay]
series: "starforged-valentin"
published: true
image: images/starforged/starforged_thumbnail_8.jpg
summary: "Session 8 of my Ironsworn: Starforged actual play journal. Valentin and Kayla continue exploration of the Lyra Outpost. Are they going to find the attacker?
"
---

Session 8 of my [Ironsworn: Starforged][starforged] actual play journal. Valentin and Kayla continue exploration of the Lyra Outpost. Are they going to find the attacker?

{% responsive_image path: images/starforged/starforged_thumbnail_8.jpg alt:"Valentin & Jones, Session 8, Starforged actual play journal" thumbnail:true %}

{%- include post_series.html -%}

Details about [truths][truths], [character][character] and [the starting sector][sector].

## Character sheet

At the beginning of the session.

<aside class="character"><em>Character:</em> Valentin “Whisper” Sikorski 
==============================================
<em>Assets:</em> Courier, Infiltrator, Glowcat
Edge: <strong>1</strong>, Heart: <strong>2</strong>, Iron: <strong>1</strong>, Shadow: <strong>3</strong>, Wits: <strong>2</strong>
==============================================
Health: ■■■■■, Spirit: ■■■□□, Supply: ■■■□□ 
Momentum: 4
==============================================
Find the person who attacked Florian and make them pay
[Troublesome] □□□□□□□□□□
-
Infiltrate the military tech factory in Selena Station and extract data for Julio. 
[Formidable] ■■□□□□□□□□
-
Background vow: Figure out what happened to my mentor Yelena Volkov. 
[Extreme] ◧□□□□□□□□□
</aside>


## Intro

<aside>
[Campaign clock: Kiana O'Neil and her team find Julio]
Likely to progress at the beginning of the session.
Roll:yes
Progress: ■■□□□□

[Begin a Session: Peril lies ahead or lurks just out of view]
+1 momentum(5)
Is it the attacker? Likely: Yes
Are they the one who killed (directly or indirectly) everyone? Almost certain: Yes.
NPC:Lux Edris, First look: plain, tattooed
</aside>

A humanoid figure was crouching behind a crate. A Naked, shaved body covered in crude tattoos. Some of them are fresh. Very similar to the symbols scattered on the walls of all rooms. Long knife in the hands, covered in blood. Deep breaths. And the faint violet glow from the eyes.

Intruders will not be allowed to take everything from him. The intruders are not going to be allowed to interrupt the process. The intruders must leave or pay the price.

## Lyra outpost II

{% responsive_image path: images/starforged/fungi_forest.jpeg alt:"fungi forest" figcaption: "Miasma, a tainted planet. Sky-breaching fungus. Illustration  generated by Midjourney AI" %}

I told Kayla that we should get the power back. Carefully. We still haven't explored the whole station.


<aside>[Undertake an expedition +wits=5 vs 2 | 5: weak hit]
Mark progress:  ■■■■■■■■□□
Suffer or peril?

Waypoint: Community: classroom or education, a mass grave of corpses
Peril: Fragile structural integrity</aside>

We entered one of the bigger rooms we have seen so far. The hexagonal shape and several corridors lead in all directions. The furniture hinted this could have been some kind of meeting or lecture room. A lot of chairs, a big holo-projector. But now it was a morgue. Several dead bodies were carefully arranged in the middle of the room creating a star-like shape. The floor, walls and even the bodies were covered in the same symbols we have been seeing all over the place. There was also a weirdly placed metal I-beam in the middle of the room.

We carefully examined each body to make sure nobody is alive.

Kayla was trying to make sure I have enough light and keep us safe. Not the best conditions. As I was trying to navigate the dark room even when the beam of her light was flowing through the other side of the room I bumped into the I-beam. It fell to the ground with a loud clank, followed by a piece of the ceiling falling on me.

<aside>[Face danger +edge = 2 vs 4 | 4: miss with a match]
Burning momentum (5) for a strong hit with a match.
+1 momentum(3)
Some opportunity for the match? 
Terminal with access to site details</aside>

I leapt to the side quickly enough and ended up diving into a pile of furniture by the wall. Several big metal sheets and a piece of a duct fell and landed exactly where I was standing.
Laying among chairs, I noticed a heavy-duty communicator tablet under my hands. As I touched the screen, the tablet turned on. The device was perhaps used by someone from engineering and maintenance because the first thing I saw on the display was a detailed, technical plan of the station.

"Bingo, I know where the generator is."

<aside>I will use this opportunity to finish the expedition, the result will tell us how helpful is this going to be. Thanks to the tablet we'll now know the layout of the station and could use Set Course to go through it.
[Finish an expedition= 8 vs 3 | 4: Strong hit]
+2 ticks on discoveries
We found and got to the generator room.
(Engineering, Engine room or power core.)
</aside>

Now let's try to figure out if we can make the power work again.

<aside>[secure advantage +wits: 5 vs 9 | 10: miss]
Pay the price: Something of value is lost or destroyed</aside>

The power core looked almost intact. The cables powering the station were cut through. I spent some time patching them up and repairing them using the equipment around. Kayla was nervously standing around and helping with her light. The tablet itself was able to provide a little bit of glow as well. 

Finally, I was ready to enable to power again. I moved the lever of the main switch up and with a couple of flashes the lights turned on.
I stood up with a victorious smirk on my face and walked towards the door.
"Now, let's find the control room. We might find the creature on came..."

A strong explosion threw us out of the room. The lights went off again. The power core was beyond repair now.

"Fuck. I guess we should maybe start with the workshop and try to find a flashlight for me."

<aside>[Set a course+supply=9 vs 5 | 5: strong hit with a match]
+1 momentum(4)

Room: Engineering, Workshop (without roll)
opportunity: Chance to restore power or function (the dice are funny)</aside>

The workshop was well equipped and big. I found flashlights pretty easily, they were everywhere.

But what was even more interesting was a cylindrical device on one of the tables.

"Kayla, this is an emergency power cell. It should be able to power emergency lights and crucial computer systems for a couple of hours. We just need to connect it to one of the power hubs. It's not the same as a functioning power core, but we'll still see and could use computers and cameras."

Together we searched through the room, hoping to find more useful stuff.

<aside>[Resupply +wits=4 vs  5 | 7: miss]
Pay the price: A new enemy is revealed.

Is it someone who was closed in the cell? Likely: yes
Is it human? 50/50: Yes
Azriel Jin, Swaggering, Hostile, Miner</aside>

As we were excited about our findings, our caution eased.
One of the several huge locker doors in the corner blasted open and a huge man jumped out, trying to push me down and take my rifle.

<aside>[Face danger +edge = 4 vs 2 | 8: weak hit]
Suffer move -1</aside>

I was a bit quicker than the huge mountain of muscles. Instead of bringing me to the ground and disarming me, he just threw me onto the wall.

<aside>[Endure harm -1, resist: 10 vs 4 | 8: strong hit]
You are not harmed (+1 health) ■■■■■</aside>

I turned around, pointing my gun at him, Kayla doing the same.

"Stop, stop... no one needs to get harmed. Calm down. Let's talk. We didn't come to harm you."

<aside>Since we are aiming at him and he already attacked, we are going to threaten and use support from Kayla (mercenary).
[compel +iron+1(Kayla): 8 vs 3 | 7: strong hit]
+1 momentum(5)</aside>

He looked at me and Kayla and raised his hands.

"Maybe you should shoot me. Better than closing me to the hole again. Better than treating me as a lab rat. Just end it, if you have the guts."

"I have no need to close you anywhere. We just arrived and found this place breached."

I told him all about how we arrived and what we saw. Mentioned Florian. He didn't seem to recognise the name. I wish I had Jones with me.

"Is there someone else alive on this station?"

"I have seen this naked tattooed guy sneaking around. I tried to ambush him once but he knew exactly where I was. I don't know why. Maybe he is not real. I don't know. I see things. All around. The air here is... it makes you see things."

He starts laughing. "It's hilarious, those bastards were injecting me with all the shit they found around and now they got a taste of their own medicine. I got used to the hallucinations. They must have been surprised.

<aside>I think this deserves to mark progress on the vow, we are learning things.
Mark Progress: Find the person who attacked Florian and make them pay.
■■■□□□□□□□</aside>

"You must understand we cannot trust you for now."
I tied his hands while Kayla made sure he didn't do anything stupid.

The closest power hub was close to the workshop and I inserted the power cell. Three short beeps signalled activation. Only the security lights turned on but better than nothing. Let's check the security terminal now.

<aside>[Set course +supply=5 vs 2 | 10: weak hit]
Suffer or complication?

Room: operations, command centre,
peril: Displays reveal a new threat elsewhere on this site
What is the threat revealed by displays?
D/P: Toxic plant</aside>

We reached the command centre. Long lists of error messages were scrolling on the displays and many warning lights were flashing. The ones mentioning powers loss and a breach were not surprising. But a screen labelled "Lab-12" was showing a  big room overgrown with a carpet of tiny glowing fungi. They were growing everywhere. On the walls, ceiling, and furniture. A red text was blinking on the bottom of the screen: "Area compromised, high toxicity level"


{% responsive_image path: images/starforged/funghi_in_corridor.jpeg alt:"a  big room overgrown with a carpet of tiny glowing fungi" figcaption: "Illustration  generated by Midjourney AI" %}

I hope our VAC suits should protect us from such a toxic environment. But what is it going to do with our new friend? 

I tried to find the attacker using the station's security cameras.
 
<aside>[Gather information +wits=8 vs 4 | 8: weak hit]
+1 momentum(6)</aside>

Took me some time to explore the station using the security cameras but  eventually, I found them. A weird, naked, tattooed figure.  Sitting in a corner of a room, holding a long knife. Their veins were strangely visible and their eyes... looked like they were glowing. The person was sitting in a room near laboratory 12. The toxic fungi carpet already managed to start overgrowing this room as well.

<aside>[Mark Progress: Find the person who attacked Florian and make them pay.]
■■■■■■□□□□</aside>

Together with Kayla, we put together a plan. We use the fact we have the emergency power and close selected doors so the creature could move only in the direction towards us. Then we'll quietly approach and attack. 

I wanted to patch a wireless connection between my personal communicator and the station's systems so I could operate the cameras remotely. But I couldn't find the communicator. Did I lose it somewhere? The last time I used it was when I was reading the data cubes in the laundry room. So we are going in blind. However, closing the doors should still give us an advantage.

<aside>[Secure advantage: +wits=4 vs 7 | 9: miss]</aside>

I was too optimistic. I managed to close a few doors, but others were unresponsive or got stuck in the middle of closing. And the last door, which was supposed to cut the creature from escaping through lab 12 failed to close as well. The noise scared the being and it ran away and disappeared somewhere where security cameras couldn't find it.

"Fuck. What now?"

Kayla rolled her eyes: "Ok, smarty pants. Enough of clever plans. Let's leave our new friend here and do it my way. A proper sweep."

Azriel was quite unhappy when she tied him to a frame. I wasn't excited either. I sealed the door and used my plasma cutter to weld a piece of metal over the door. The being shouldn't be able to get to him. Hopefully, we don't die. He would die there and it would be our fault.

Kayla checked her gun. "Let's go. We'll keep searching quietly and systematically. Eventually, we have to run into it. Good hunting."

<aside>[Face danger: +shadow=9 vs 10 | 6: weak hit]
make suffer move -1, momentum -1 (5)</aside>

We slowly and quietly went through the station. Corridor after corridor, room after room. It took quite some time but finally, we managed to find it.

<aside>Where did we find it? Engineering, Vehicle bay / garage. 
Let's say, it's the same room we have already been in.</aside>

We quietly entered the big vehicle bay room with the huge excavator-like machine. Going from cover to cover, watching each other's back. Kayla raised her hand, signalling to stop. Ten she pointed into a distant corner. There, behind one crate we saw only a small piece of the being's skin.

I nodded. Let's go.

<aside>[Entre fray +shadow=7 vs 3 | 9: weak hit]
objective: defeat the being
rank: we are two on one,  we have guns, it has a knife. Let's say that's only troublesome.
you are in control</aside>

We try to sneak into a better position so both of us could open fire. 

<aside>[Gain ground +shadow=9 vs 8|10: weak hit]
stay in control
+1 on next move</aside>

And fire.

<aside>[strike +edge+1(gain ground)=3 vs 8 | 10]
you are in a bad spot
pay the price: loose momentum -1(4)</aside>

Just a fraction of a second before we pressed the triggers, the being turned its head and looked into my eyes. Its eyeballs were violet and glowing. Then it moved with inhuman speed and climbed on the wall. Our shots hit only the space where it was sitting before.

"Quick, we need to take position behind the crates in the corner. That'll limit the number of angles it can attack from!"

<aside>[React under fire +edge=7 vs 8 | 6: weak hit]
suffer -1 (momentum 3)
you stay in a bad spot</aside>

We run into the corner and pressed our backs against the wall. The being suddenly dropped from the ceiling, a long knife ready to attack.

<aside>[clash +iron=3 vs 1 | 3:weak hit]
You stay in the bad spot
Mark progress ■■■□□□□□□□
PtP: endure harm -1

[endure harm +health=9 vs 4 | 5: strong hit]
In control (yes, strong hit on suffer moves during allows us to gain control!)
+1 momentum(4)</aside>

It hit me with a knife, only a surface wound, but the rush of adrenaline helped and I kicked it so hard it fell on its back.

I aimed for its head...

<aside>[strike +edge=2 vs 4 | 5: miss]
[Pay the Price: You are separated from something or someone]
you are in bad spot</aside>

But it was quicker than me. It jumped back to its feet with its inhuman speed and punched my gun. It flew into the air and fell somewhere behind the creature.

<aside>[clash +iron=5 vs 2  | 1: strong hit]
mark progress twice ■■■■■■■■■□</aside>

It tried to stab me with the knife again but I managed to catch its hand and pry the knife out. I stabbed it into the middle of its chest and pushed it away from me. It stumbled for a second.

"Now, Kayla!"

<aside>[Take a decisive action=9 vs 3 / 10: weak hit]
Others pay the price: Someone else suffers the cost.</aside>

Kayla didn't need my instructions. Burst fire from her gun ended the being.

I looked at her: "Good job!"
I noticed she is holding her neck. Blood between fingers.

"What happened, did it hit you?"

"I think it was a reflected bullet. A lot of hard metal around. I should have been more careful with the burst. But it's only a surface wound."

We looked at the creature on the ground. Once it was a human, that was sure. Was it still human when we killed it? Was it even responsible for its actions? Hard questions, no answers. But it is certainly not going to hurt anyone else.

<aside>[reach a milestone: Find the person who attacked Florian and make them pay]
■■■■■■■■■□

[Fulfill your vow = 9 vs 8 | 3: Strong hit]
+1 tick on quests track</aside>

<aside>[end session]
Finishing this vow is a good place to finish the session.

The next time we'll pick up our new friend and figure out what to do with them. We might need to return somewhere where we can release them. And yeah, maybe Valentin should try to find his communicator.

+1 momentum(5)</aside>

[ironsworn]: <https://www.ironswornrpg.com/> "Ironsworn"
{:target="_blank"}
[starforged]: <https://www.ironswornrpg.com/product-ironsworn-starforged> "Starforged"
{:target="_blank"}
[license]: <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/> "Starforged"
{:target="_blank"}
[stargazer]: <https://nboughton.uk/apps/stargazer> "Stargazer"
{:target="_blank"}
[swn]: <https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/230009/Stars-Without-Number-Revised-Edition-Free-Version> "Stars Without Number"
{:target="_blank"}
[sofatko]: <https://www.instagram.com/sophiehardy5/> "Anna Marklová (Instagram)"
{:target="_blank"}
[truths]: <{{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2022-05-09-starforged-valentin-campaing-start %}#truths> "Session 0: Truths"
[character]: <{{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2022-05-09-starforged-valentin-campaing-start %}#character> "Session 0: Character"
[sector]: <{{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2022-05-09-starforged-valentin-campaing-start %}#starting-sector> "Session 0: Starting sector"